   The PlayStation VR

   Sony’s PlayStation VR.

   Virtual reality has officially reached the consoles. And it’s pretty good!
   Sony’s PlayStation VR is extremely comfortable and reasonably priced, and
   while it’s lacking killer apps, it’s loaded with lots of interesting ones.

   But which ones should you buy? I’ve played just about every launch game,
   and while some are worth your time, others you might want to skip. To help
   you decide what’s what, I’ve put together this list of the eight PSVR
   games worth considering.

  “Rez Infinite” ($30)

   IFrame

   Beloved cult hit “Rez” gets the VR treatment to help launch the PSVR, and
   the results are terrific. It includes a fully remastered take on the
   original “Rez” – you zoom through a Matrix-like computer system, shooting
   down enemies to the steady beat of thumping electronica – but the VR
   setting makes it incredibly immersive. It gets better the more you play
   it, too; unlock the amazing Area X mode and you’ll find yourself flying,
   shooting and bobbing your head to some of the trippiest visuals yet seen
   in VR.

  “Thumper” ($20)

   IFrame

   What would happen if Tron, the board game Simon, a Clown beetle, Cthulhu
   and a noise band met in VR? Chaos, for sure, and also “Thumper.” Called a
   “violent rhythm game” by its creators, “Thumper” is, well, a violent
   rhythm game that’s also a gorgeous, unsettling and totally captivating
   assault on the senses. With simple controls and a straightforward premise
   – click the X button and the analog stick in time with the music as you
   barrel down a neon highway — it’s one of the rare games that works equally
   well both in and out of VR. But since you have PSVR, play it there. It’s
   marvelous.

  “Until Dawn: Rush of Blood” ($20)

   IFrame

   Cheeky horror game “Until Dawn” was a breakout hit for the PS4 last year,
   channeling the classic “dumb teens in the woods” horror trope into an
   effective interactive drama. Well, forget all that if you fire up “Rush of
   Blood,” because this one sticks you front and center on a rollercoaster
   ride from Hell. Literally. You ride through a dimly-lit carnival of
   terror, dual-wielding pistols as you take down targets, hideous pig
   monsters and, naturally, maniac clowns. Be warned: If the bad guys don’t
   get you, the jump scares will.

  “Headmaster” ($20)

   IFrame

   Soccer meets “Portal” in the weird (and weirdly fun) “Headmaster,” a game
   about heading soccer balls into nets, targets and a variety of other
   things while stuck in some diabolical training facility. While at first it
   seems a little basic, increasingly challenging shots and a consistently
   entertaining narrative keep it from running off the pitch. Funny,
   ridiculous and as easy as literally moving your head back and forth, it’s
   a pleasant PSVR surprise.

  “RIGS: Mechanized Combat League” ($50)

   IFrame

   Giant mechs + sports? That’s the gist of this robotic blast-a-thon, which
   pits two teams of three against one another in gorgeous, explosive and
   downright fun VR combat. At its best, “RIGS” marries the thrill of
   fast-paced competitive shooters with the insanity of piloting a giant mech
   in VR. It can, however, be one of the barfier PSVR games. So pack your
   Dramamine, you’re going to have to ease yourself into this one.

  “Batman Arkham VR” ($20)

   IFrame

   “I’m Batman,” you will say. And you’ll actually be right this time,
   because you are Batman in this detective yarn, and you know this because
   you actually grab the famous cowl and mask, stick it on your head, and
   stare into the mirrored reflection of Rocksteady Games’ impressive Dark
   Knight character model. It lacks the action of its fellow “Arkham” games
   and runs disappointingly short, but it’s a high-quality experience that
   really shows off how powerfully immersive VR can be.

  “Job Simulator” ($30)

   IFrame

   There are a number of good VR ports in the PSVR launch lineup, but the HTC
   Vive launch game “Job Simulator” might be the best. Your task? Lots of
   tasks, actually, from cooking food to fixing cars to working in an office,
   all for robots, because did I mention you were in the future? Infinitely
   charming and surprisingly challenging, it’s a great showpiece for VR.

  “Eve Valkyrie” ($60)

   IFrame

   Already a hit on the Oculus Rift, this space dogfighting game was one of
   the first to really show off how VR can turn a traditional game experience
   into something special. It’s pricey and not quite as hi-res as the Rift
   version, but “Eve Valkyrie” does an admirable job filling the void left
   since “Battlestar Galactica” ended. Too bad there aren’t any Cylons in it
   (or are there?)

   More games news:

     * ‘Skylanders Imaginators’ will let you create and 3D print your own
       action figures
     * Review: High-flying ‘NBA 2K17’ has a career year
     * Review: Race at your own speed in big, beautiful ‘Forza Horizon 3’
     * Sony’s PlayStation 4 Pro shows promise, potential and plenty of pretty
       lighting
     * Review: ‘Madden NFL 17’ runs hard, plays it safe

   Ben Silverman is on Twitter at ben_silverman.
