   Although Lucasfilm is already planning a birthday bash for the Star Wars
   Saga at Celebration Orlando this April, fans might get another present for
   the saga’s 40th anniversary. According to fan site MakingStarWars.net,
   rumors abound that Lucasfilm might re-release the unaltered cuts of the
   saga’s original trilogy.

   If the rumors are true, this is big news for Star Wars fans. Aside from
   limited VHS releases, the unaltered cuts of the original trilogy films
   haven’t been available since they premiered in theaters in the 1970s and
   ’80s. If Lucasfilm indeed re-releases the films’ original cuts, then this
   will be the first time in decades that fans can see the films in their
   original forms. Here’s what makes the unaltered cuts of the original
   trilogy so special.

The Star Wars Special Editions Caused Controversy star wars han solo

   Thanks to the commercial success of Star Wars, George Lucas has revisited
   and further edited his films for re-releases. The most notable — and
   controversial — release were the Special Editions of the original trilogy.
   In 1997, to celebrate the saga’s 20th anniversary, Lucasfilm spent a total
   of $15 million to remaster A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return
   of the Jedi. The Special Editions had stints in theaters before moving to
   home media.

   Although most of the Special Editions’ changes were cosmetic, others
   significantly affected the plot of the films. The most notable example is
   the “Han shot first” scene in A New Hope. As a result, the Special
   Editions generated significant controversy among Star Wars fans. Many fans
   remain skeptical about George Lucas’s decision to finish each original
   trilogy film “the way it was meant to be.”

   star wars

   While the Special Editions represent the most significant edits to the
   original trilogy, the saga has undergone other changes. Following up on
   the saga’s first Blu-ray release in 2011, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM)
   began remastering the entire saga in 3D, starting with the prequel
   trilogy. The Phantom Menace saw a theatrical 3D re-release in 2012, but
   Disney’s 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm indefinitely postponed further 3D
   releases.

   In 2015, Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith received limited 3D
   showings at Celebration Anaheim. Other than that, it seems as though
   Disney has decided to refocus Lucasfilm’s efforts to new films. Of course,
   that’s why the saga has produced new content beginning with The Force
   Awakens. However, it looks like Lucasfilm isn’t likely to generate 3D
   versions of the original trilogy anytime soon.

Why the Original Film Cuts Matter

   [IMG]

   Admittedly, the differences between the original trilogy’s unaltered cuts
   and the Special Editions appeal to more hardcore fans. Casual fans are
   less likely to care about whether Greedo or Han Solo shot first. Still,
   given Star Wars’ indelible impact on pop culture, there’s certainly a
   market for the original trilogy’s unaltered cuts. They might not be for
   every Star Wars fan, but many of us care about them.

   ILM supervisor John Knoll, who first pitched the story idea for Rogue One,
   said last year that ILM finished a brand new 4K restoration print of A New
   Hope. For that reason, it seems likely that Lucasfilm will finally give
   diehard fans the original film cuts that they’ve clamored for. There’s no
   word yet whether the unaltered cuts will be released in theaters or on
   home media. At the very least, however, fans will likely get them after
   all this time. After all, the Special Editions marked the saga’s 20th
   anniversary. Star Wars turns 40 years old this year, so there’s no telling
   what’s in store.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   Would you like to be part of the Fandom team? Join our Fan Contributor
   Program and share your voice on Fandom.com!
