   [IMG]

   Last updated September 14, 2016

   Graduation parties are a great way to commemorate the years of hard work
   teens and college co-eds devote to education. They’re also costly for mom
   and dad.

   The average cost of a graduation party in 2013 was a whopping $1,200,
   according to Graduationparty.com; $700 of that was allocated for food.
   However that budget was based on Midwestern statistics, and parties in
   urban areas like New York City are thought to have a much higher price
   tag.

   Thankfully, there are plenty of creative ways to trim a little grad party
   fat without sacrificing any of the fun or celebratory spirit.

   Graduation (Mike Watson Images/Moodboard/Getty)

   Parties hosted at restaurants, clubhouses and country clubs eliminate the
   need to spend hours cleaning up once party guests have gone home. But that
   convenience comes with a price tag. A country club may charge as much as
   $2,000 for room rental and restaurant food and beverage will almost always
   cost more than food prepped and served at home.

   Save money hosting the party at home. Thomas Jackson/Digital Vision/Getty
   Images

   Instead of hiring a DJ, use your iPod or Smartphone to spin the tunes.
   Both easily hook up to most speakers or mp3 compatible docks to play music
   from your music library. Or download Pandora, the free online radio app,
   and play hours of music for free.

   Personalize the music with a playlist of the grad’s favorite songs or
   songs that were big hits during his or her years in school.

   Online radio can take the place of a hired DJ. Spencer Platt/Getty Images
   News/Getty Images

   Avoid canned drinks, which guests often open, but don't finish. Serve
   pitchers of tap water with lemon and cucumber slices or sliced
   strawberries for an interesting and refreshing flavor. Opt for punches and
   non-alcoholic drinks for high school graduates that allow guests to dole
   out the exact amount they want to drink.

   Serve drinks in pitchers, not in cans. evgenyb/iStock/Getty Images

   Instead of inviting everyone you – and the graduate – know or ever knew,
   scale back the guest list. Forgo inviting guests that you or your grad
   haven't seen for eons. There is no reason to provide provisions for people
   who are essentially out of your lives. Sticking to a small, but personal,
   guest list allows more time to mingle with loved ones during the party,
   too.

   Limit guests to those close to the graduate. Kane Skennar/Photodisc/Getty
   Images

   See if your grad and his best friend, girlfriend or close family member
   would consider hosting a joint party. You can split some of the expenses,
   especially when the two graduates share mutual friends. You'll also have
   another parent to bounce ideas off of and to help you stick to your budget
   when you're tempted to splurge.

   Throw a joint bash for big savings. Mike Watson Images/Moodboard/Getty

   Skip carving stations of prime rib and jumbo shrimp as appetizers,
   especially for high school graduation parties. Instead, serve some of the
   graduate's favorite side dishes that are cost effective, like a big pot of
   spaghetti with breadsticks. Opt for easy and simple food such as pizza,
   finger food and mini appetizers.

   Avoid pre-packaged foods and pre-made deli platters. These can be quite
   costly. Instead, make your own cheese and deli platters for less than half
   the cost of pre-made.

   Cost effective appetizers are just as satisfying as pre-made deli
   platters. Mark Stout/iStock/Getty Images

   Instead of an evening dinner party, host a grad lunch or all appetizers
   party. Brunch and lunch fare or finger food costs less than dinner. Guests
   also tend to consume less alcohol in the middle of the day, which keeps
   cost down.

   A brunch gathering will cost less than a dinner party. Mark
   Stout/iStock/Getty Images

   Decorate your party in the graduate's current school colors or the colors
   of the school he or she will be headed to next. Décor that is not
   specifically graduation-themed may cost a bit less, and any leftovers can
   be re-used for future parties, picnics and events.

   Theme the party by color without graduation-specific decor.
   jethuynh/iStock/Getty Images

Related Searches

   Promoted By Zergnet
