   Get to know the features that make it the most complete browser for
   building the Web.

     * Screenshot

WebIDE

       Develop, deploy and debug Firefox OS apps directly in your browser, or
       on a Firefox OS device, with this tool that replaces App Manager.

       Learn more about WebIDE
     * Screenshot

Valence

       Develop and debug your apps across multiple browsers and devices with
       this powerful extension that comes pre-installed with Firefox
       Developer Edition.

       Learn more about Valence

    Important: Sync your new profile

   Developer Edition comes with a new profile so you can run it alongside
   other versions of Firefox. To access your bookmarks, browsing history and
   more, you need to sync the profile with your existing Firefox Account, or
   create a new one. Learn more

Features and tools

     * Screenshot

Page Inspector

       Examine the HTML and CSS of any Web page and easily modify the
       structure and layout of a page.

       Learn more about Page Inspector
     * Screenshot

Web Console

       See logged information associated with a Web page and use Web Console
       to interact with Web pages using JavaScript.

       Learn more about Web Console
     * Screenshot

JavaScript Debugger

       Step through JavaScript code and examine or modify its state to help
       track down bugs.

       Learn more about JavaScript Debugger
     * Screenshot

Network Monitor

       See all the network requests your browser makes, how long each request
       takes and details of each request.

       Learn more about Network Monitor
     * Screenshot

Web Audio Editor

       Inspect and interact with Web Audio API in real time to ensure that
       all audio nodes are connected in the way you expect.

       Learn more about Web Audio Editor
     * Screenshot

Style Editor

       View and edit CSS styles associated with a Web page, create new ones
       and apply existing CSS stylesheets to any page.

       Learn more about Style Editor
