   Glass cloche terrariums are not only appealing to the eye, but they also
   preserve a bit of nature in your home and serve as a simple, yet
   beautiful, piece of art. Closed terrariums are easy to care for, as they
   retain much of their own moisture and provide a warm environment with a
   consistent level of humidity. You won’t have to water the terrariums
   unless you see that the walls are not misting up. Small growing plants
   that don’t require a lot of light work best such as succulents, ferns,
   moss, even orchids.

   Glass cloche terrariums Glass cloche terrariums (Lucy Akins)

   What You'll Need:

     * Cloche
     * Planter saucer, small shallow dish or desired platform
     * Floral foam oasis
     * Ruler
     * Spoon
     * Floral wire pins or paper clips
     * Small plants (from a florist or nursery)
     * Moss
     * Tweezers
     * Other small decorative items (optional)

   Step 1

   Measure the circumference of your cloche and cut the foam oasis about 3/4
   inch (2 cm) smaller. Place the foam oasis into a container full of water
   and allow to soak until it sinks to the bottom. Dig out a hole on the
   oasis large enough to fit your plant, being careful not to pierce all the
   way through to the bottom.

   Dig a hole in the oasis. Dig a hole in the oasis. (Lucy Akins)

   Step 2

   Insert your plant into the hole.

   Orchid in foam oasis Orchid in foam oasis (Lucy Akins)

   Step 3

   You can add various plants if you wish.

   Various foliage Various foliage (Lucy Akins)

   Step 4

   Using floral pins, attach enough moss around the oasis to cover it.

   Attach moss. Attach moss. (Lucy Akins)

   Step 5

   Gently place the cloche over the oasis. The glass may push some of the
   moss upward, exposing some of the foam.

   Place cloche over oasis. Place cloche over oasis. (Lucy Akins)

   Step 6

   Simply pull down the moss with tweezers or insert more moss to fill in the
   empty spaces.

   Rearrange moss. Rearrange moss. (Lucy Akins)

   Step 7

   You can use any platform you wish. In this case, a small saucer was used.

   Place cloche on a platform to sit on. Place cloche on a platform to sit
   on. (Lucy Akins)

   Step 8

   This particular terrarium rests on a planter saucer and features a small
   white pumpkin.

   Cloche placed on a terracotta saucer Cloche placed on a terracotta saucer
   (Lucy Akins)

   Step 9

   This particular terrarium was placed on a wood slice and a little toy
   squirrel was placed inside to add a little whimsy.

   Placed on a wooden slice Placed on a wooden slice (Lucy Akins)

   Finished Terrarium

   Displayed alone or in a group, these pretty arrangements allow you to add
   a little nature to your decor or tablescape.

   Cloche terrarium Cloche terrarium (Lucy Akins)

Featured
