   Supporters of Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump cheer during
   election night at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 9,
   2016.  / AFP / JIM WATSON        (Photo credit should read JIM
   WATSON/AFP/Getty Images)

   JIM WATSON/AFP/Getty Images

   22 Dec, 2016 22 Dec, 2016

   SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Snopes fact checker and staff writer David Emery posted to Twitter asking if
there were “any un-angry Trump supporters?”

   Emery, a writer for partisan “fact-checking” website Snopes.com which soon
   will be in charge of labelling “fake news” alongside ABC News and
   Politifact, retweeted an article by Vulture magazine relating to the
   protests of the Hamilton musical following the decision by the cast of the
   show to make a public announcement to Vice-president elect Mike Pence
   while he watched the performance with his family.

   SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

   The tweet from Vulture magazine reads, “#Hamilton Chicago show interrupted
   by angry Trump supporter.” Emery retweeted the story, saying, “Are there
   un-angry Trump supporters?”

   This isn’t the first time the Snopes.com writer has expressed anti-Trump
   sentiment on his Twitter page. In another tweet in which Emery links to an
   article that falsely attributes a quote to President-elect Trump, Emery
   states, “Incredibly, some people actually think they have to put words in
   Trump’s mouth to make him look bad.”

   Emery also retweeted an article by New York magazine that claimed
   President-elect Trump relied on lies to win during his campaign and that
   we now lived in a “post-truth” society. “Before long we’ll all have
   forgotten what it was like to live in the same universe; or maybe we
   already have,” Emery tweeted.

   Facebook believe that Emery, along with other Snopes writers, ABC News,
   and Politifact are impartial enough to label and silence what they believe
   to be “fake news” on social media.

   Lucas Nolan is a reporter for Breitbart Tech covering issues of free
   speech and online censorship. Follow him on Twitter @LucasNolan_ or email
   him at lnolan@breitbart.com
